[Applause]
well good afternoon and welcome I'm
delighted to have you here we have a
special treat today soon as the Mercy
Mercy could be sued Arthur mercury is a
researcher clinician and best-selling
author his book cancer the Emperor of
all maladies won the 2011 Pulitzer Prize
for nonfiction New York Times described
him as one of the most important writers
and thinkers of our time he grew up in
India and a multi-generational household
his father was an executive in
Mitsubishi his mother a former teacher
his grandmother was a powerful influence
and uncle in the house was diagnosed
with mental illness from very early age
he trained as a singer in the indian
classic tradition he was drawn to
science and medicine as he got older
influenced by his grandmother's fatal
illness and the cancer death of his
favorite English teacher the idea of
writing a book came to him when he was
training at the dana-farber a colleague
urged him to have a life outside of the
hospital good advice
he wrote that the Emperor of all
maladies over the course of five years
at the same time he was starting a
family and establishing a career The New
Yorker called it an extraordinary
achievement his second book is called
the laws of Medicine field notes from an
uncertain science the subject of
imperfection uncertainty in the future
of medicine
his most recent book the gene an element
history another bestseller
Bill Gates put it on his list of
recommended reading in 2016 his research
parallels the subject of his books his
lab at Columbia University Medical
Center studies the biology of malignant
and pre malignant diseases of the blood
his research is published in Nature the
New England Journal of Medicine and
other peer-reviewed journals he was
named among Time Magazine's 100 most
interesting people in the world he lives
in New York City with his wife a
sculpture
Susan Z they have two children I'm sorry
Saro de city dr. Martha GE enjoys
cooking continues to practice and
perform Indian music
last month he began his new role is a
medical columnist for The New York Times
Sunday magazine this video will show you
more the knowledge of Medicine the power
of words the determination to discover a
breakthrough Siddhartha Mukherjee an
oncologist with a unique combination of
inquisitive research and dynamic writing
ability advances investigation into
understanding all in the quest for a
cure
born in New Delhi India Siddhartha
Mukherjee showcased his academic skill
early in life after achieving his
school's highest award the sword of
Honor
he went on to become a Rhodes Scholar
graduating from Stanford University the
University of Oxford and from Harvard
Medical School in the year 2000 after
his residency in internal medicine at
Massachusetts General he trained in
oncology as a fellow at the Dana Farber
Cancer Institute preparing the next
generation of physicians dr. Mookerjee
has been assistant professor of medicine
at the Columbia University Medical
Center since 2009 filled with curiosity
throughout his career
dr. Mookerjee gravitated toward the lab
he investigated cellular genes that
change the behaviors of cancer cells
putting that research into words led to
a breakthrough in dr. mukajee's career
in order to find the future of medicine
he decided to look into the past and
wrote his Pulitzer prize-winning book
the Emperor of all maladies a biography
of cancer when I met Sid and read the
book I knew this should be a public
television documentary with SIDS books
donnas bring it to the fore and said
look we must talk about it his writing
and research took a personal turn with
his latest work the gene an intimate
history Siddhartha Mukherjee explored
his own family history to see what lies
within our DNA for his advances in
medicine and science the Government of
India conferred him its fourth highest
civilian award the Padma Shri in 2014
[Music]
dr. Siddhartha Mukherjee takes a
question and accepts the challenge in an
attempt to find a solution he delves
into the most intricate systems in the
body with dedication to investigation
his hope is to one day cure control &
Conquer Cancer
please join me in welcoming dr.
Siddhartha and varsity
[Applause]
well needless to say we're delighted to
have you here so thank you very much for
joining us my pleasure let me let me
start with like sort of a little bit of
your background tell me why did you
decide to become a doctor and when did
you know so my decision to get up I sort
of came in in Reverse in some ways I
trained as a scientist first I was in
England and I was training in immunology
so I trained as an immunologist and one
of the projects that I was given as a
young graduate student was on a virus
that I knew nothing about called
epstein-barr virus now I know quite a
lot more about the virus but it's so and
it as it turned out I was looking at
immune responses to viruses and became
more more interested in sort of the the
you know where did where did the immune
response begin how does it begin and so
I actually went backwards from science
and I'm saying backwards because many
people in medicine go into the sciences
after having seen seen a human
physiology and then enter the world of
the basic sciences I went backwards so I
became very interested in in that and of
course I was talked to a little bit
before I had a family history that was
that pushed me towards thinking about
medicine we've talked a little bit about
it but and that was those two things
really came together for me in in
medicine oh why can't you well again the
the in the challenge that the challenge
of cancer was so great that it seemed as
if it seemed as if it was them it was
the one thing that beckoned more than
anything else this was I tried
I was cancer with my rejection choice no
no no no no I I just said the
fundamental problem of cancer not just
the scientific and the physiological
problem of cancer but also what went on
the the larger the
that we found ourselves in in the 1990s
when I was training around cancer how to
how to think about it what to do about
it what is it
how did how how's our conception of what
cancer is how is that changing all of
those questions were so seductive at
that time and most important yet I
didn't anticipated it the way that your
relationship with patients as an
oncologist I mean certainly you have
that as you have some of that as a
surgeon as well of course but but but
but the idea that you would have this
this kind of intense like a chemical
bond was very was very attractive to me
we wrote two major tones and both of you
talked about them in terms of a
biography yeah of a disease or a gene my
biography well I think by ugh the word
biography applies more than than a
history or something some more anemic
word because the idea of illness is so
close to us I was particularly inspired
by Susan Sontag writing for instance
where the the the when you think about a
history of an orphan illness when you
think about the story of an illness or
in the case of of the gene that the new
book when you think about that story it
comes closer it cuts closer to who we
are and almost defines in the case of
cancer defines it defines to me a kind
of alternative self Sonntag talks and
it's the quote that opens the book she
talks about illness as the Nightside of
life you inhabit the dayside of life
during the day and the night side of
life at night illness being the night
side of life and I talked to myself you
know this inhabitation day and night
suggested to me a different alternate an
alternate life it was and therefore the
word biography in fact the name
I think I thought for a long long time
and I didn't the name didn't occur to me
for the first book of subtitle
especially didn't occur to me I feel
much much later and then when I when I
hit upon the idea the word biography
made so much sense that it you know it
came much later in the genesis of that
of that book you know a lot of us know
the history of Mendel yeah and Darwin
etc but you know I was almost an
interesting where the word gene and
genome come from right so it's an
interesting story
you know Mendel didn't use the word you
think Mendel had no idea really of the
existence of what we would now call
genes even though he saw it in this
abstraction what's astonishing to me
about looking at that history is how
much even people who assume the words
even people who think they have a kind
of fluidity with the constant how much
we don't know or didn't know about the
origins and of course that tells us how
much we didn't don't know I didn't know
about the future the nettles genius at
least to me was that he took he fused a
particular kind of mathematics with
biology people had not thought about
biology in this mathematical way because
the themes the fact that it would be
interior harmonies across inheritance
was really absent so when men will read
his paper was an interesting story when
men will read his paper in the 1860s he
read it out not to some very August body
of you know the the Royal Society of of
science some way he read it out to a
group of some agricultural
basically a group of farmers interested
in breeding and his topic his his what
he had brought to what he brought to
heredity was what you would call big
data today he brought big Dave get ready
he basically shells
tens of thousands of peas and brought
that idea in
used a kind of mathematical statistical
way of thinking and no one had bought
into my biology and no one had done that
simple thing before you know you did a
lot of sort of basic research you went
to visit where he was yes where he done
his work yep
and you had a little difficulty getting
in there there's a small I wrote a night
a small piece about about going to
mangos monastery you know what's
interesting about it is that again we
live in an era in disease where our
thinking is dominated by genes and
genomics but know very few people I
maybe can show hands maybe if you have
gone to the place where all this was
discovered so my question was why don't
I just go there why don't I go to
Mendel's monastery and I was going to
spend a week there so I went to Mendel's
monastery try to spend a week there and
the woman the the woman who was at the
front desk said that I happened to have
arrived in the they were going through
some renovation was closed and so I said
well but you don't understand I've come
from so far away there's no way I would
have known can I not do that end is
there any way and she said well you have
to apply in triplicate
you have to do you know the and I so I
said well who do I apply to and she said
to me
so you know coming from India I knew
this this this ruse was known to me so I
said so I said to her I says formally
like what I said I hereby apply to you
and she was so stunned by the idea of me
saying absolutely
I took a little bow I said I hereby
apply to you and she let me I said two
could play at this game
speaking about playing the game you know
the sort of the modern era of the
genomics really started in 2000 mm-hmm
and I wonder your book can make a
wonderful quote and I think it applies
to some of the individuals and Ronald
there you said that modesty is a virtue
but you get further without it you want
to describe that time and some of the
people we know I refuse to take any
names but but but but it's it's an it's
an important idea I think in in human
history the the draft sequence of the
human genome and the things that have
occurred since then in terms of our
ability to influence change read and
write genes is an extraordinarily
ambitious and also extraordinary
arrogant idea it lacks a certain cousin
it has a hubris about it we are becoming
in the world of words of john sulston a
machine that is learning to read and
write its own instructions what would
what would what is what is life like for
a machine that reads its own code and
then begins to write its own manual
these are questions that are extremely
important they're circulating with great
importance through the world of medicine
what if we were able to diagnose
diseases before the diseases occurred
how much that would empower us but on
the other hand what what would do to our
selves our conceptions of ourselves
there's one word that sends a kind of
chill up your spine which I have a
chapter called big with that word so the
word provider a provider is a survivor
of a disease you haven't yet had but
imagine your life being on one hand
medicine being able to imagine be able
to run a trial before a disease occurred
so that you could really understand the
the the the you know intervene at the
first step of the disease from the other
hand do we want to enter into this kind
of era of surveillance of anxiety of
provider ship these are questions that
are extraordinarily important to to who
we are and what we're getting into in
this new era of of advanced reading and
writing of the human genome but the
magnitude of this discovery and this
development is 3 billion base pairs yep
give people some idea of the magnitude
of that number what so one way to
describe it is is if it was written as
if it was printed as a in standard font
a single person your genome would be 72
sets of the Encyclopedia Britannica 72
full sets so every wall in this room
would be covered with one person's
genome imprinted in kind of an
encyclopedia for money we actually
stretch into a couple of other rooms as
well so that would be the library of
yourself you would be essentially you
could go and pick out one volume of this
72 full sets of the Encyclopedia and it
would be inscrutable to you it would
read a CT g c CT g g g CT it said that's
unreal I just made that up but but but
but but the idea that from that code of
codes that you can launch from a single
cell this thing that becomes us of
course chance lays it all of course the
environment plays a role but the but the
fundamental determination of who we are
at their eyes
the consequence of that is it's to me
very very interesting and of course
remember that the difference between you
and a person who has a lethal disease of
potential lethal disease like
Huntington's disease could be you know
one half of one page of that
encyclopedia of that full encyclopedia
the relevant difference between you the
relevant difference between you and a
woman who has a tenfold risk of
developing breast cancer ovarian cancer
in her lifetime may be one word in that
seventy two sets of the Encyclopedia
Britannica and and and the capacity to
find those words that make the
difference and then act on those on that
word on those words is I think that what
we're learning how to do and obviously
has implications there wide you for
human beings what brings up the topic of
a huge amount of data and how we're
gonna keep track of it right which is
the north I mean can you imagine now
that the cancers you're now sequencing
both the individual and the killer yeah
and so by the way just to let you know
so I'm a mostly a leukemia biology
looking at Annette Assist I work on
blood cancers virtually all my patients
that I see in clinic will undergo some
sort of sequencing all of them and
represent on a person
yeah so how do you keep track of the
data well so now I mean you know
obviously computational power has helped
it's not it's what's interesting is no
longer how do we keep track of the data
that has become slightly solvable it's
the question of how we make sense of the
data those are totally different things
make sense is that is a really key
finding or the key piece I was very
taken by a recent article which has not
even been peer-reviewed at these days
you can as you know you can put things
out before they are peer reviewed for
public review for wider peer review so
you talked about this for a second
because there's many implications for
disease and take me just two minutes to
talk about but I think it's very very
interesting and important a a
computational by a geneticist interested
in in in height ask the question can you
predict height from the genome knowing
nothing else just knowing the sequence
of the Encyclopedia as it were for an
individual now we know height is highly
heritable we know this because of a
thousand studies twelve parents tend to
produce twelve children identical twins
tend to be similarly or similar height
if you remove nutritional constraints
and illness so what this paper sets out
to do is is is to ask the question can
you use the genome for pretty tight now
what's interesting about it is that
until now we knew several genes that
were involved in in height but if you
added the sum total of their
contribution to human height you'd only
get very little it would only explain
very little of human of the variation in
human height based on the influence of
genes so this team that took an
interesting approach they said they went
to a bio Bank the UK biobank
and they took there were 500,000 maybe
more individual genomes and individual
Heights
cross-listed against each other all
anonymous and they said what if we
unleash deep learning on these 500,000
variations in the human genome it's not
full sequence with variations and and
individual Heights and essentially by
attaching connection weights to each of
the variations they could get to within
point five centimeters of actual height
so in other words they've you could
essentially input a series of variations
in the human genome and you would output
within point five centimeters of actual
height the predicted height and when
they went back to ask the question well
how many genetic loci or how many
variations were were involved that turns
out that the number is not known yet but
it's on the orders of thousands if not
tens of thousands right so they're there
this kind of experiment raises an
incredibly important series of questions
about disease and about how we think
about ourselves one question is what
we began to predict this across other
features where does one stop what are
the limits what are the computational
limits that allow us how deep can we go
can we predict other biometric features
and where is it where do we begin to
pretty dangerous biometric features
where do we stop who tells us when to
stop so so that's one and then from the
standpoint of medicine you know imagine
this there were tens of thousands of
variants that were predicting the risk
of cardiovascular disease where we put
all this data would you carry it around
with you so that you would know future
predictions of disease again going back
to this idea of pre virus shape so the
the not just the data landscape but the
ethical landscape that's opened up with
these kinds of experiments combining
deep learning with with our
understanding of genetic and genomic
diversity I think is going to be a
series of questions that will really
spend a lot of time in the next few
years are you familiar with Craig
Venters work face absolutely yeah won't
you tell him about that so I mean I
should say that that work I mean I read
it because I was I'm interested in
genetic variation from the standpoint of
cancer that works been you know it's
there's been reviews and reviews of
reviews it's it's still in an in an in
an arena which were needs to be vastly
more polished but the hypothesis was
that again could you use genetic
variation to predict fundamental
features of the human face and the
answer is yes to some extent we probably
refine it it seems to me that there are
people who are critical of it right now
because all the you know all the the
it's no it's not absolute but do I think
that within the next 10 years this this
kind of work will change for instance
criminology the answer is absolutely yes
I do think you will be able to predict
maybe not the real face of the
individual that may sound a little
far-fetched but maybe you'll be able to
predict fundamental features for
instance there right for instance
something about there
the general structure of their body
something about the kind and texture and
the color of their hair something about
the texture or yes something about their
eyes and and then subsequently many many
features that open up ethical landscapes
where we really really need to think
about this I mean is it is it is it
going to be kind of you know obviously
this genetic profiling what profiling is
inescapable here and remember we're in
we're sitting in a hospital profiling is
what we do in medicine whether you know
two fundamentally the profile to
understand risk is is one of the goals
of medicine one of the goals of cancer
is to understand risk where does our
understanding of risks then stop when it
enters a social arena where where risk
big flock becomes profiling you know
those those words are abutting words
where do we where we draw those those
strong lines these are I think important
questions I try to answer them a little
bit in the gene but I think they're
important questions obviously we're
talking about profiling have you been
sequenced I have not been sequenced I
have not been sequenced partly because
you know just let's let you know how
trivial it would be for me to be
sequenced my our laboratory does
sequencing on I would say daily basis
excellent sequencing is something that I
do daily sending out exome sequencing on
a daily basis so I have not been
sequenced for several reasons most
importantly because of my personal
history I don't want to know I don't
want to know the risk alleles for mental
illness in me I have computationally I
have a 10 to 20 fold increased risk for
bipolar disease and and schizophrenia I
don't want to know but more importantly
I don't want to know the risk profiles
of my children I have two daughters and
I if I knew I would fundamentally begin
you know the question I ask myself is
what if only one of them had even a
marginal risk profile
we know very living it we know that
schizophrenia is gonna turn out to be
much like many other complex traits in
which they'll be not one but tens of
thousands of what I call nudge effects
not genes as opposed to sharp genes I
never heard that it's a scientific
expression well I could make it I could
make it into a scientific mission it's
an it would sound very very very complex
and abstract and no one would understand
it but but that's basically what I'm
talking about they that one of the
things we're finding out about human
genetics is that many many traits not
all of them many many traits are
dominated by nudge effects as opposed to
shove effects that's very important for
disease but I don't want to know the
nudge effects and my children because
what if one of them tested it would
fundamentally change the way I think
about the two of them and this is a
question of course all of you are asking
yourselves right what if one of your two
children so yourself your spouse your
how about your children would you have
them sequence no I will not
I would not until I mean I would so
here's my obviously there there there's
a line between them I don't want to know
I don't want to know about nudge effects
that have no medical consequent want to
know about it and this is actually
sounds like a like the ostrich burying
its head in the sand but in fact this is
a very refined medical principle they're
fine medical principles unless it's
actionable information unless it's
actionable particularly as it pertains
to individuals that we care about is
often information that we don't need to
know now for a research study yes but
I'm not you know my parent my children
are not a research study for me so how
about pharmacogenomics you know that can
affect your kids yes they it could
affect so again the is just going back
to the same example the the number of
instances in in pharmacogenomics as you
know very well the number instances
where you have a such
powerful effect that it would radically
change a decision making right now are
few and far between they'll be more
coming until that information becomes
actionable I'm not interested when it
becomes actual we're now when I find out
that the that you know that within the
within the code of my children's genome
there's an actionable variation of that
that will make a big difference to them
medically then I'll be inclined to find
out you know interesting me I used to
you know when we used and equate you
late people with work yep I wouldn't be
there and some people you just wave a
coumadin by the bedside and they be
antiquated you and others times you'd be
shoveling it in four days and no effect
and clearly that's your knowledge right
what's interesting about that yeah so
that what's interesting mine and this
will be the case across multiple drugs I
mean I I'm extraordinarily familiar with
this because this is very much the case
with cancer in some in some people of
course you know you give them standard
cancer therapy and they have very little
impact other people the tumor melts away
and you have a powerful response how
wonderful it would be to be able to
predict from a patient's tumor and and
their normal sample the capacity predict
how they would react to medicines that
would be a wonderful thing but until it
became actionable I'm going to I'm going
to resist when it becomes action I'm not
going to is I'm a geneticist I mean you
know a cancer geneticist this is what I
live by but right now especially for
mental illness which is the one thing
that is that is of course the most
relevant to my family I would like to
resist so let's let's talk a little bit
about CRISPR and you can probably some
of the people in the audience may not
know what CRISPR is but maybe you want
to talk a little bit about what you see
is the positives and
eventually the negativism crisper so
first let me take a step back and say
really a crisper and the whole
technology around Chris Burke has nine
is that is really a suite of
technologies and it's better to talk
about the suite of technologies other
than individual instances instances of
the suite of technologies allow us to
make it very simple allow us to make
edits directed intentional changes in
genomes we could we could do some of
them with very cumbersome tools before
these new technologies have refined the
capacity to do this and just to go back
to our example you know again remember
the encyclopedia let's say I wanted you
let's say I wanted to go to you know
volume 72 page 314 and change ACTG erase
that and change it to a CGG of course
that could be highly relevant it could
be the difference between one human
being and their brother who happens to
have cystic fibrosis those that tiny
change could revert or change a disease
or the course of disease so these
technologies allow us to become much
much more efficient at doing this
whether but what the side effects are
whether you mistakenly change something
else in another page is a question
although more and more rare realizing
that they're quite specific actually so
the question then becomes what do we do
how do we use it
what are the what are the limits of how
we use it so there are really three
arenas that I think about in terms of
their use one of them I would call
genetically modified organisms as
broadly as you can imagine so modifying
on one hand crops modifying mosquitoes
potentially creating new weapons against
pests so that's one arena and that of
course has there's a huge debate
swirling around that we know what are
the limits how safe is their bio safety
concerns there
the second arena is in humans what we
would call
non germline or somatic gene therapy so
you don't go into sperm and eggs you use
the CRISPR or CAD like to change the
biology of stem cells the genomes of
stem cells like blood stem cells
something I work on so last week we used
CRISPR I'll give you one example last we
can use crisp the CRISPR system in cord
blood stem cells so these are stem cells
from human cord blood if you put them
into another recipient they would
repopulate the entirety of their blood
so these are highly active stem cells in
blood and using CRISPR we essentially
change the genomes of 90% of the cord
blood cells that number was
inconceivable five years ago to make a
direct deliberate change in 90% of cord
blood stem cells inconceivable five
years ago and what's the relevance well
you could take a patient who has sickle
cell anemia and give them a bone marrow
transplant from their own cells there
and change the sickle cell gene you
could take a patient with thalassemia
and and so on and so forth you could
take a patient with immunodeficiencies
and insert or remove or change genes
that that affect that and repopulate
their blood with their own blood or cord
blood where you'd made a deliberate
change so really a new universe and then
the third arena is obviously the most
controversial so not genetically
modified organisms not somatic gene
therapy but germline gene therapy what
if you introduced these kinds of changes
into sperm and egg cells and and if you
did that of course this would be
heritable through multiple generations
potentially to every generation that
would be permanently changing the human
genome because once you've introduced
that change you can't take it back every
time you reproduce that would be so
those the way to think about is that
really to split it up into these three
arenas and talk about the three arenas
really separately and that's each one of
them has a debate going on but it really
helps to clarify that they're really
three applications or three arenas well
and your concern yeah well so if you
just go go one by one in the if if you
make directed deliberate changes in
other organisms the concerns are safety
and biosphere the concern is humility
and and and and understanding enough
about the biosphere to have the humility
to know what to do when you unleash
powerful new genetic technologies on in
the biosphere I am told I don't know
this for sure I am told that the
mosquito has no use aside from being a
human test but we don't know we don't
know maybe the mosquito occupies some
niche in in in ecology that we are on we
don't know about and you know the famous
story of the butterfly effect story we
don't know and we won't to know you know
there's a famous science fiction story
of a man who goes backwards in time and
it's a kind of fantastical story this
was written 20 years ago I read it as a
child he goes backwards in time and II
and the end the the set up is that you
go back in time to hunt dinosaurs it's a
sport but you're told that you can only
hunt dinosaur a dinosaur which is
destined to die within the next ten
minutes because of course you can
predict all of this so one of these in
this crazy story this guy goes back in
time but the dinosaur he gets
flabbergasted he steps off the road and
kills a butterfly in this story and
wakes me flashes forward back into his
own time the entire world has changed
this was the this was the kind of
conceit of the story everything that he
knew about his change nothing remains
the same because he stepped off and
accidentally you know nip the wing of a
butterfly or something but the idea here
is is that so that's the GMO piece the
somatic piece the biggest concerns are
danger to the to the to the person to
the recipient what if in trying to
correct the sickle cell gene you made
the cells cancerous you unleashed a
mutation that was you didn't know about
and in fact five years later ten years
later some kid that you had treated for
sickle cell anemia using his CRISPR for
but bone marrow transplant all of a
sudden came down with a lethal cancer
the concerns for the germline gene
therapy are the deepest what where do we
draw the lines we you know what do we
interferon who is you know these we are
now playing with the human genome in
permanence is it to be restricted to
diseases of extraordinary suffering are
we going to allow ourselves to change
you know to remove genes that increase
the risk of cancer
what about human traits like height what
about other traits that are we gonna
start really playing with things that we
were previously unavailable how do we
regulate this something that government
is going to step into and I know we
stopped a couple of occasions in the
past in science going to march forward
regardless of what we do well so the
government is so the government is a
very surprising thing happened to me
very surprising there was a national
panel that shocking to me oh yeah so and
everyone should know about this the
national panel met and I thought they
would say absolutely not so human
germline or genetic manipulations and
manipulations and embryos should we
should draw a strong line but in fact
the panel met it was it was composed
very diverse it was comprised of lots of
thoughtful people scientists people from
the from the legal world patients
patient advocates and they essentially
said that in the United States it would
be permissible to make germline changes
under three circumstances the
circumstances were and in fact what's
interesting about it is that if you
think about it they're very logical
they're the same that I described in the
book and in the gene independently I
mean I I had written the book six months
before the panel had met number one is
that the
the that it should involve extraordinary
suffering these were the exact words
that were used that there should be
extraordinary amounts of suffering this
is not to be taken in other words
there's no this is not to be taken
lightly we will we are allowed to
intervene where there's extraordinary
suffering I'll come back to that phrase
in a second the second one is that we
should really have some sort of
certainty that when we're making a
genetic change that we will indeed
change the disease of extraordinary
suffering that this is not to be done
with things that have light or weak
links with diseases some genes have
small weak links some a very powerful
links and the third one is that it
should be justifiable that we should be
able to justify it there should be no
other simple reasonable choice
there should be no coercion this should
be free justifiable etc but of course if
you think about it all those three words
who defines what those words are and
what is extraordinary what's
extraordinary suffering to you i what is
justifiable to you what is the exact
strength of the link between the gene
and and the trait so this is an arena
that I was very surprised by I thought
there would be a bright line difference
and we put a put a put a moratorium but
in fact if the more torrent the
moratorium doesn't exist we are now
moving forward
so obviously there's tremendous
opportunities with the human genome both
in understanding and then potentially in
therapy as we go forward
there are also some dark sides and one
of the things that I noticed that you
dedicated your book to Carrie buck yep
tell us about that this are the saga of
Carrie buck so that decision was very
made very early in the book to dedicate
the book to Carrie but Carrie buck I
found out actually didn't know Carrie
buck was one of the first women to be
sterilized by government mandate because
she was thought to have a genetic
variant of in
facility I'm using words from the 19th
from the 1920s and 1930s in fact when
you look through the data and now we
know there was probably nothing of the
sort but she was stereotyped and the
that plane made by the by the by the
government was that she had she had a
hereditary form of imbecility and she
was confined to a state colony where
so-called imbeciles were held and and
the fear this was like this was in the
throes of the great eugenics movement
the fear was that imbeciles would read
and propagate more imbeciles and Carrie
buck the case of Carrie buck rose to the
supreme court and Oliver Wendell Holmes
famously wrote that three generations of
imbeciles is enough and thereby forced
her to be sterile as she had one child
who died she would never have another
child again I wanted that to be the
bright line reminder of where this could
go of our capacity to intervene on
humans on human heredity where the dark
history of that and where how quickly
that our word had devolved into that
moment I wanted to remind people in
there for the dedication of the book
telling about the evolution from there
to learn the rest the world so so
interestingly the the idea of eugenics
the idea of of using technologies
however crude the idea of using
technologies to improve the human
condition through controlling heredity
was born in in very exalted circles the
you know it was considered a very very
good idea lots of people who had very
benign intentions in the 1800s 1890s and
1900 signed on to this idea we we would
call them today there would be you know
among the great humanists
scientists writers and the word was
coined by golden and Frances Gorton who
was Darwin's cousin and Dalton's idea
was you know this is one way to improve
human race the human condition make us
better by selective breeding so this was
born in in England then it morphs it
comes into the United States where it
moves from selected selective breeding
intermarriage to selective sterilization
and it's here that the idea of selective
sterilization is given a kind of
imprimatur of of social acceptance
hence Carrie buck and hence tens of
thousands of women who were sterilized
as men who were sterilized because of
epilepsy because of so-called imbecility
because of a variety of of things that
turn out to be treatable or in fact you
know shouldn't even have been defined as
non eugenic conditions and then in its
final form it it goes to it sort of
moves again and metastasizes to Nazi
Germany where it moves from
sterilization to extermination
so rather than sterilize people
exterminate them so that they don't have
the capacity to produce more and all in
the name of that same word eugenics so
that progression I think is very
important to remember as we move forward
it's important to remember for me
because my family has very much the the
you know the remarks the fingerprints of
the very things that were being
exterminated had had you know in some
fantastical universe those fingerprints
that the fingerprints are the genetic
fingerprints that inhabit and haunt my
family in other places would have led
them to to their death or to
sterilization so it's important to
remember these circumstances with a
great deal I think of humility and
thought thoughtfulness
let me change this tone of us for just a
second you've had a tremendous
opportunity to read study meet
interesting people along the way if you
had an opportunity to sit down and
interview one of these people
what a lovely question who would you
pick
Darwin you know the the the the the the
way Charles Darwin changed the way we
think about the world is so fundamental
that even to to see him in his in his
English cottage I think would be a would
be a kind of fantasy of a vision come
true
the the only person who competes for me
is not his contemporary but certainly a
person live not far away from him and
was Dickens so Darwin Dickens you you
choose the news stuck in the DS my
second the DS exactly so I have to you
have a incredibly tell their wife I do
have a black was more talented in I am
yes
and she was a MacArthur Genius award
winner a contemporary sculptures how do
your ideas bounce across each other it's
a very very you so we rarely I should
say that if you're thinking that dinner
conversations in the mukajee's II
household are scintillating they're
they're not because we're usually a
kitchen cooking that's no it's because
it's it's it's things like did you
remember to pay the bill I did you what
about the
insurance no no far from it we I think
have evolved a way of working together
she reads everything I ever publish I
try to see things that that Sarah does I
I'm in the studio their studio is not
far away and the children the kids come
they've grown up in this way we have we
could take the work and we could take
she reads if she even reads my
scientific papers we could wish it tough
she's the toughest critic you see we you
know the this the old old saying it
better be it's better we could kick by
your friends than by your enemies you
could extend that better we could kick
by your wife than your enemies but maybe
maybe that doesn't hold it but but but
but we we I think we we spend serious
time serious alone time with each
other's work and take it very very
seriously and it's not a you know the
the the things is you know I will she
will write margins full of notes on on
something I'm going to publish against
ranging from scientific papers to
something that might come out in The
Times or in The New Yorker or come out
as a book when I go to the studio I
really really spend time thinking and
thinking about the nature of the of the
work and trying to find out the one
place I think we meet is I like to ask
it's whenever I see something I like to
ask what question is this something
trying to answer I'm I like this way of
thinking it's helped me a lot
if I see a book it could be a book could
be a work of fiction when I see a
scientific paper when I see a clinical
study the first thing I ask is what
question is this trying to answer
I needed answering may but maybe
partially and the same thing goes so
when I see Sarah's work I always work
and it's a very strange way of thinking
about her work as I say well so okay
there's this massive sculpture which
could be the size of his room sometimes
the works other sizes room and I say the
first thing I'm saying to myself is what
question is this piece trying to answer
and the same thing when I when I write
something what is it what question is it
trying it's it's something that keeps me
gives me clarity about whatever I've got
one more question then we're going to
throw it all from the audience so get
your questions ready you recently wrote
an article for The New Yorker
yeah essentially subtitled the algorithm
will see you know the algorithm was here
in the excess and essentially a I versus
MD you see that happening so that that
article generated more back and forth
you know controversy and they're not
virtually anything everything because I
wanted to lay out some of the important
questions that I think are coming one of
the important questions that are coming
the the idea that we will use deep
learning very broadly to change medicine
is to me already is a moot point I think
we are already there we will go there
even even more absolutely and the the
the the resistance to it particularly
for certain kinds of knowledge I think
is futile so the question really is what
is it that well made the question it
forces us to answer is what is it that
doctors do that that deep learning
systems cannot do what is it that we do
that's amazing and special and there are
many things that's not one thing one
thing that strikes me is that we ask the
question why
deep learning tools machine big data
interestingly is is still powerful act
at Jen looking at patterns
finding doing diagnostics but it often
is it struggles with the why question
why did this disease happen why is it
that you know a particular trait is
linked with a particular feature why
does why is it that well why does
pathophysiology occur so I think one of
the things that big that that deep
learning the game is is really forcing
us to do is reconsider what we're
especially good at hypothesis building
is something we're very good at
hypothesis testing is what we were good
we're good at pattern recognition is
actually okay in fact it is our failure
of pattern recognition it is our failure
it is the or the flaw in our
capacity in our brain's capacity to
recognize patterns that allows us to be
strange creative thing thinkers we look
for exceptions we look for things that
you would otherwise been in one basket
we say to yourself well wait a second
somehow that doesn't make sense
we're very good at that kind of stuff so
I think that's where sort of our medical
integrated future with as someone put it
our robot overlords will be we will
become accessories we will become
collaborators but we will reserve for
humans the things that humans do very
well answering why providing compassion
providing connection contact context
those kinds of things so just a
parentheses on that this article was
stimulated by a discussion that you had
or with one of our former speakers here
Sebastian Thrun mm-hmm
who came and talked to us and
subsequently develops our opportunity to
recognize the patterns from malignant
melanoma that's right yeah and which is
becoming
a clinical entity and so that they now
with 95% accuracy can diagnose a
malignant melanoma from a benign lesion
so that was impetus and so the moral of
the story is keep coming to these so you
meet these people yeah let's start over
here dr. mukajee thank you so very much
for your very stimulating and
enlightening discussion today it's it's
great to to hear a fellow like Sounion
who attended college as well okay
I had a question related to just the
power of the of the genome and are
entering the the sort of this new era
and and I'm wondering what your most
common kind of questions or
misconceptions that you hear about genes
and and genomics and perhaps the
interface with the power that they have
and and how machine learning and that
approach can can take to understanding
what genomics is well I'll give you it's
not just a misconception I mean there
are many many trivial misconceptions so
I'll just neglect them for a second I'll
give you something that's actually
really I think a concern as for people
who talk about precision medicine so let
me talk about that for a second because
the word the phrase precision medicine
is something you know again I'm coming
from the world of cancer where the idea
that you can use genetic information
so genetic precision medicine genetic
information to predict to be able to
treat with great but much much more
refined with refinement and accuracy a
patient because their individual
mutations would predict response this
idea was born in the world of cancer and
now spreading across other disciplines
as well but again remember that in the
example that I that were the rise that
struck me recently that in in the case
of many human diseases the genetic
architecture of the disease is not just
one or two or three or four genes but
tens of thousands of genes with small
nudge effects when you try to build a
biological applause
biological model of these tens of
thousands of nagy effects we begin to
struggle so for instance again to give
you the the the the example of human of
height I'm making this up I'm
speculating here what if one of these
tiny nudges responsible for 0.25
centimeters or 0.025 centimeters of
variation in height what if in fact that
was a gene that set that that led to the
set point of your appetite right so this
is making this up speculatively the
point here is that that to make a
plausible biological much easy to make a
biological model if you have simple
connections between nodes and you have a
simple connection you can say okay well
this this gene affects the metabolism of
your bone you know makes bones grow
longer and therefore intervening on this
will hopefully you know not touch
anything else will spare everything else
will make your bones grow longer and
become you you know you'll get we get
get they get they get the height portion
solved but once you end one of the
complications of real human complex
human traits is that they're tens of
thousands of genes with small and large
effects and lots of something we call
pleiotropy and making a plausible
biological model so that we can
intervene on that is becoming might
become tough and if that becomes tough
then making medicines that work on these
will become tough so that is a challenge
i think this is one of the concerns and
challenges as we try to make new kind of
medicine occur is that we might be
bumping up against the genetic
architecture of complex human diseases
and it's an incredibly complicated idea
to explain to ourselves let alone the
lay public but we have to do it because
we've started using words like precision
medicine so i'm happy to talk more about
it but this is a tough idea and could be
extended all the way alzheimer's disease
heart disease you know things like this
thank you dr. mukherjee for your amazing
presentation i want to thank dr.
cosgrove for his great contribution to
the field of
I know dr. Cosmo you're going to retire
soon and we know and I'm sure everybody
agrees that you'll be missed so thank
you for your service and thank you for
everything you've done you have a second
life as an interviewer on you know you
could take away how you wrote it down
I hope am i wat to do that by the way
you did it very well thank my queriers
my question for Siddharth is she does
have two questions one is a macro
question and yet there is a micro
question okay I've listened to many
amazing people and read about them
including Satya Nadella
yes Microsoft sundar Pichai of Google
Ajay Banga of MasterCard and Indra Nui
from coke and now you who have
contributed amazing to the society what
is it about this beautiful country
called the United States of America that
people come from India and many other
parts of the world that allows these
young bright people to flourish and
contribute amazing to the society and
it's called Raven it's really something
we can argue about the fact is that they
do and my micro question is if you don't
you know if you allow me is if we study
the genomics of these people since
that's your special I know you are not a
social scientist and you're not going to
develop immigration policies but if we
if we study the genomics of these people
which is your interest what do you think
we'll find because it might help us to
bring even smarter people to the country
and make this country prosperous for
next 200 years thank you for listening
so so the macro question I'll tackle the
question of tackle you know so I think
this is I'm gonna borrow the answer we
were actually able to borrow the answer
from sundar Pichai which assume that we
recently asked this question as well
maybe we were together so there was
asked this question as well and soon
they said you know it's a little bit of
a denominator problem the denominator
problem is that obviously you've chosen
very kindly you've chosen
lots of numerators people people come to
the you
United States because they won't do
because they're driven by the by their
dreams people like me they are driven by
freedoms and perhaps some former
freedoms that we used to enjoy people
are driven by the idea that there's a
fundamental or there was a formerly a
fundamental belief in the emancipatory
process of Science and Technology in
this country and when we lose that
belief people will stop coming I will
stop coming people like me will stop
coming so it's a very very fragile
ecology that was invented in this
country 200 odd years ago which then
that ecology attracted like you know
like sunlight a trap the transplants
attracted people from the most
adventurous people from the world over
we saw our adventure here because we
thought this was the most adventurous
place to be because we couldn't imagine
a universe when I when I first came to
the - to the College in the United
States at Stanford I went to a
professor's office hours this was Paul
Berg who had won the Nobel Prize his
office hours outside his office office
was a little signup sheet on a piece of
paper and you could sign up whether you
you know whether you were an
undergraduate first first-year medical
student a you know up you know whether
you had won the Nobel Prize yourself you
just put your name down on that sheet of
paper and you could go and have a
conversation with him about the future
of genetics and whether recombinant DNA
would become would change your
particular field that's the kind of
adventure the accessibility the openness
and that's what made you know we are
whether it would have been officially
the numerators of that of that of that
process so if you destroy the ecology
the the sunlight will go away thank you
again for being here I heard your
conversation with Sam Harris on his
podcast that was also a very interesting
conversation
and you talked about how cancer is
basically a genetic disease and it's
it's a problem of mutating genes and and
that there are two ways basic ways that
this can happen one is just a simple
replication errors and the other are
chemical that overtake or toxins and so
I'm wondering what what percentage where
do you sit on this controversy what
percentage do you think of each and and
for the ones that that we now think are
just simple replication errors how many
of those might actually be caused by
chemical or toxins that we just don't
know about yet so it's a it's a tough
question to answer because there's not a
lot of empirical data I'll give you some
important I'll give you one piece of
important information here and I'm going
to go straight into the inter
controversial mode the one piece of
information here that's relevant is that
and and and I'll challenge anyone to it
so this is an interesting experiment the
statement that I wanna make is that we
have not discovered a single major
chemical carcinogen preventable chemical
carcinogen since the 1990s 1970s not one
okay so you could say why why have we
not and so much the words are important
single major preventable chemical
carcinogens we've discovered many
chemical carcinogens since the 1990s
their impact on broad human health is
minor each one of them minor nothing of
the comparative effect as for instance
smoking right so and the question is why
the answer could be number one is
because of a conspiracy because we
aren't being inclined to look in the
right places so that could be one answer
the second answer could be that it is
death by a million cuts so in fact we
will never find major ones the major
one's already been found and that most
of the impact is going to be in small if
could be and number three is that they
don't exist we and and that the rest of
cancer whatever the rest might be and
some people believe it's the major part
some people it's a minor part the rest
of cancer is going to be unfortunately
the consequence of replication errors
errors in copying DNA which are
intrinsic to human cells so the point
that I wanted to make the sound I want
to make to everyone is that we we have
to be honest with each other about
answering this question
we cannot be wrapped up we have to bring
data to the question we can't get
wrapped up in individual proclivities in
our su question because the question has
enormous consequences for cancer so I
can only tell you right now that the
evidence at least to me the evidence
that random chance cellular replicative
events cause cancer is quite high and
that we have not discovered major
chemical carcinogens so we're stuck in
this moment where we're trying to find
the ones that will solve the missing
problem you know why are we getting by
we have we have cancer we have cancer
because we're aging as a population but
what's the what's you know what are the
carcinogens that are driving this but we
have to be honest in answering this
question and dividing it up thoughtfully
that would be my you know that's my
general answer thank you okay and then
one more question and we're gonna wrap
it up mental health particularly in this
country has a huge stigma attached to it
and I wonder as you looked at your own
personal history how that your family
history how that impacted you personally
and then as we look at the genetics
behind it I wonder if you think that we
may eventually be able to take mental
illness from being looked at as a
personal fault to being considered the
disease process that it is and then will
we be able to force insurance companies
actually pay for that they care people
need yeah I think that's absolutely I
mean that's very very important points
and and part of the reason to write the
gene is to is to do exactly that is to
bring us up just up to a kind of
understanding of mental health I have
very little doubt that that powerful
determinants of mental health sit in in
individual genomes this is not
you diminish the role of the environment
absolutely not
we know for instance even with diseases
where there's a powerful genetic link
such as schizophrenia identical twins
don't have 100% concordance of
developing the disease they may have
high concordance tenfold 54 higher than
the general population but but but they
but it's still it's not still 100
percent so this is not to diminish the
environment but this is also to remind
ourselves that powerful genetic links
exist it goes back to the same so as far
as insurance is concerned this is a
obviously or payment is concerned this
is a reminder that that we we really
need to understand and be empathetic to
the way we are made up as human beings
the the challenge lies in building that
biologically plausible model because
then once we have a biological plausible
model that's where human creativity
actually this is where this is what
human beings are very good at the
challenge is there because with
schizophrenia this to give you one
example
very much like height very much like
other complex human traits we have we
know that there's a powerful genetic
link and yet D if we add up the
individual contributions of all the
genes that have been known they're tiny
so this is the missing heritability
problem in mental health in
schizophrenia in particular we know that
they're powerful genetic links and yet D
we have not been able to find those
those genes that contribute to the to
the to the heightened risk and we have
not been able to build a model that
explains a mental model a biological
model explains why a child all of a
sudden you know has this terrifying
devastating breakdown in their in in
their in their mental processes and if
we can't build a model we cannot find
targets that are rational to be able to
treat and to be able to to be able to to
tackle and therein lies the therein lies
the peril and the promise of medicine
applied to the mental health building
real models building real and deep
understanding
of how known genetic risk translates
into disease thank you thank you for
your comment that comment thanks for
being here in your discussion you
mentioned Charles Darwin's cousin and
from my reading I know he also made
contributions to statistics and also to
meteorology yep and people like da Vinci
also made contributions to multiple
fields and my sense is that today
academia has become far more specialized
and far more siloed and I'm curious if
you think that's going to hinder our
society's ability to answer some of the
big questions that you and dr. cosgrove
touched on during the discussion earlier
yeah so so very broadly speaking I do
obviously I think that that you know
living in in variac you know siloed
academic Enterprises can be a problem
that's that I you know just to just
remember that that some people are by
definition highly defined how you define
in their quests how you define in their
goals very defining the ambitions they
don't want to they don't define
themselves
interdisciplinary others are profoundly
the Disciplinary they look for ways to
connect fields their connectors Malcolm
Gladwell has a nice description of these
two phenotypes of humans I think I think
there's a again I go back to the idea of
an ecosystem I think a a thriving
intellectual ecosystem has both has both
kinds of actors you have the
cardiothoracic surgeon who is
astonishingly good at cardiothoracic
surgery but is a terrible general
surgeon but then you have to have the
general surgeon who can can can move
between surgical disciplines surgical
fields with the kind of facility that
that his or her colleagues might not
have and finally you have the you know
you have the the internist who sits and
thinks about you know how AI is going to
transform general surgery who may not
even you know have surgical hands
himself or herself
so there's our surgical brain
himself/herself so there is a there's a
there is a real there's a way in which I
think the the the diversity of of human
endeavors and it's necessary to preserve
the diversity of human endeavors that
what if you lean too hard in one
direction you often inevitably lose the
lose the other was head I want to thank
you very much for being here today
you have enlightened us we have
challenged us you have thrilled us with
the potential for the future and you've
also added a note of caution and I want
to thank you very much for on behalf of
those please join me in thanking
and just a couple of reminders our next
speaker is going to be Ginni Rometty who
is the president CEO of IBM was going to
be here on November 16th and following
that later a date to be announced John
Doerr who is the managing partner of
kleiner perkins a venture capital firm
in California will be here to discuss
disruption so thank you very much for
being here we look forward to seeing you
in November